Update UCD section relative to last discussion with Semantics WG (#61)
ivoa/HighEnergyObsCoreExt: HighEnergyObsCoreExt.tex

Author: following the discussion with semantics on June 10th , we can keep this line  to indicate the electron case is covered anyway.

> Though {\bf event-list}s {\em may\/} include estimators for calibrated physical values, they typically still have to be corrected for the photometric, spectral, spatial, and/or temporal responses of the telescope and detector combination to yield scientifically interpretable information. The mappings between physical measurements of the source properties and the observables are called Instrument Response Functions (\glspl{IRF}\footnote{We try to avoid using the term \gls{IRF} in a normative sense since historical usage across the broad \gls{HEA} community (and from facility to facility) varies. In some cases, \gls{IRF} has been used to mean specifically the product of the \gls{ARF} and \gls{RMF}, whereas in other cases \gls{IRF} has been used more generally to mean any instrumental response function regardless of type.}).  Some \glspl{IRF} are probabilistic in nature\footnote{For example, the energy matrix is a probability density function.}, and in addition may depend on the set of events selected for analysis by the end user.  They are usually not invertible, so methods such as forward-folding fitting (using source models with any combination of spectral, spatial, temporal, and/or polarization components that are estimated) are needed to estimate physical properties, such as the true flux of particles from a source arriving at the instrument, given the measured observable quantities. The \glspl{IRF} generally evolve over time with the instrument and observation characteristics, and are usually defined for a specific time interval and may be decomposed into a standard set of independent components (see \S~3.1.5 of \citealt{2024ivoa.note.heig}), such as the spatial point-spread function or the energy-migration matrix or different messenger particle types, where each component may be stored or computed separately.  Since both \glspl{IRF} and {\bf event-list}s are required to analyze \gls{HEA} data, some \gls{IVOA} standards must be modified  expose both of them via the \gls{VO}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though {\bf event-list}s {\em may\/} include estimators for calibrated physical values, they typically still have to be corrected for the photometric, spectral, spatial, and/or temporal responses of the telescope and detector combination to yield scientifically interpretable information. The mappings between physical measurements of the source properties and the observables are called Instrument Response Functions (\glspl{IRF}\footnote{We try to avoid using the term \gls{IRF} in a normative sense since historical usage across the broad \gls{HEA} community (and from facility to facility) varies. In some cases, \gls{IRF} has been used to mean specifically the product of the \gls{ARF} and \gls{RMF}, whereas in other cases \gls{IRF} has been used more generally to mean any instrumental response function regardless of type.}).  Some \glspl{IRF} are probabilistic in nature\footnote{For example, the energy matrix is a probability density function.}, and in addition may depend on the set of events selected for analysis by the end user.  They are usually not invertible, so methods such as forward-folding fitting (using source models with any combination of spectral, spatial, temporal, and/or polarization components that are estimated) are needed to estimate physical properties, such as the true flux of particles from a source arriving at the instrument, given the measured observable quantities. The \glspl{IRF} generally evolve over time with the instrument and observation characteristics, and are usually defined for a specific time interval and may be decomposed into a standard set of independent components (see \S~3.1.5 of \citealt{2024ivoa.note.heig}), such as the spatial point-spread function or the energy-migration matrix or different messenger particle types, where each component may be stored or computed separately.  Since both \glspl{IRF} and {\bf event-list}s are required to analyze \gls{HEA} data, some \gls{IVOA} standards must be modified to expose both of them via the \gls{VO}.
```

We propose to add the following {\em dataproduct\_type\/} terms to ObsCore to better define a \gls{HEA} {\bf event-list} and an {\bf event-bundle} that includes the {\bf event-list} and associated data:

\begin{quote}

> {\bf event-list}: a dataset that records a collection of observed particle-detection events, such as incoming high-energy particles, where an event is typically characterized by a spatial position, a time, and a spectral value ({\em e.g.\/}, an energy, a channel, a  height).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{\bf event-list}: a dataset that records a collection of observed particle-detection events, such as incoming high-energy particles, where an event is typically characterized by a spatial position, a time, and a spectral value ({\em e.g.\/}, an energy, a channel, a pulse height).
```

\subsection{{\em energy\_min\/}/{\em energy\_max\/}}

> The existing attributes {\em em\_min\/} and {\em em\_max\/} that define the coverage of the spectral axis (defined as wavelength expressed in units of m) are not user friendly for \gls{HEA} where datasets are generally selected according to an energy range ({\em i.e.\/}, inverse wavelength) in units of eV (or scaled units of eV, for example keV, MeV, GeV, TeV, PeV). Unlike the radio domain where $\lambda = c/\nu$, where $c$ is an almost universally remembered physical constant, the conversion $\lambda = hc/E$ is not simple for the user to express. As the spectral range covered by \gls{HEA} data is many decades larger than for other wavebands, the accurate numerical representations of typical \gls{HEA} spectral ranges as {\em em\_min\/}/{\em em\_max\/} requires quantities with many digits of precision and exponents ranging from $\sim\!10^{-5}$--$10^{-22}$, and are misleading when used for energy ranges of massive particles.  Since specification of the spectral range is largely fundamental to data discovery in the \gls{HEA} regime, we propose to add attributes {\em energy\_min\/} and {\em energy\_max\/} that specify the minimum and maximum spectral range values in units of eV\null. Note that the sense of these attributes is {\em opposite\/} that of {\em em\_min\/} and {\em em\_max\/} because of the inverse wavelength relationship between energy and wavelength, so numerical comparisons must be transposed ({\em e.g.\/}, $E>E_{\rm thresh}$ becomes $\lambda<hc/E_{\rm thresh}$).  (An alternate approach would be to add attributes {\em em\_min\_energy\/} and {\em em\_max\_energy\/} that represent the energies corresponding to {\em em\_min\/} and {\em em\_max\/} in units of eV\null. This is less  since queries on an energy would need to be specified as {\em em\_max\_energy\/}${}\leq E <{}${\em em\_min\_energy\/}, which is likely confusing. This approach is not recommended when describing massive particles, including neutrinos.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The existing attributes {\em em\_min\/} and {\em em\_max\/} that define the coverage of the spectral axis (defined as wavelength expressed in units of m) are not user friendly for \gls{HEA} where datasets are generally selected according to an energy range ({\em i.e.\/}, inverse wavelength) in units of eV (or scaled units of eV, for example keV, MeV, GeV, TeV, PeV). Unlike the radio domain where $\lambda = c/\nu$, where $c$ is an almost universally remembered physical constant, the conversion $\lambda = hc/E$ is not simple for the user to express. As the spectral range covered by \gls{HEA} data is many decades larger than for other wavebands, the accurate numerical representations of typical \gls{HEA} spectral ranges as {\em em\_min\/}/{\em em\_max\/} requires quantities with many digits of precision and exponents ranging from $\sim\!10^{-5}$--$10^{-22}$, and are misleading when used for energy ranges of massive particles.  Since specification of the spectral range is largely fundamental to data discovery in the \gls{HEA} regime, we propose to add attributes {\em energy\_min\/} and {\em energy\_max\/} that specify the minimum and maximum spectral range values in units of eV\null. Note that the sense of these attributes is {\em opposite\/} that of {\em em\_min\/} and {\em em\_max\/} because of the inverse wavelength relationship between energy and wavelength, so numerical comparisons must be transposed ({\em e.g.\/}, $E>E_{\rm thresh}$ becomes $\lambda<hc/E_{\rm thresh}$).  (An alternate approach would be to add attributes {\em em\_min\_energy\/} and {\em em\_max\_energy\/} that represent the energies corresponding to {\em em\_min\/} and {\em em\_max\/} in units of eV\null. This is less desirable since queries on an energy would need to be specified as {\em em\_max\_energy\/}${}\leq E <{}${\em em\_min\_energy\/}, which is likely confusing. This approach is not recommended when describing massive particles, including neutrinos.)
```

\subsubsection{Instrument-related Quantities}

We propose to add a new UCD {\em instr.detection\/} as the base of the hierarchy to describe instrument-related properties of particle events detected by \gls{HEA} detectors.  Initially, we propose a small set of event-related UCDs that identify key properties that are particularly important for \gls{HEA} data analysis.

\paragraph{Event Grade}

> For imaging X-ray instruments (especially those based on CCD detectors), detected events typically deposit charge into more than a single detector pixel.  The events are assigned a ``grade'' based on how charge is deposited into the central pixel and surrounding pixels, and the grade information is essential for data analysis since typically only a subset of grades will correspond to valid events.  We propose to use these combined UCD terms {\em meta.code.class;instr.detection\/} to provide the UCD string for the {\bf event\_grade} column.

Reviewer: "for the {\bf event\_grade} column" is not correct because there is no standardization of the names of columns such as this from instrument to instrument or from facility to facility.  We certainly don't use the column name "event_grade" anywhere: our ACIS event lists have two columns that identify event grades: grade and fltgrade (but other instruments/facilities use different column names).  This is the same issue I've raised repeatedly - without a UCD specifically for event grade, "meta.code.class;instr.detection" does nothing to help interoperability across HEA facilities.

\paragraph{Pulse Height}

For many X-ray and gamma-ray instruments, the signal observed in a given detector spectral channel is the result of event counting and would typically be recorded as a Pulse Height Amplitude (PHA), or perhaps a Pulse Invariant (PI) value that is calculated from PHA by applying an appropriate gain calibration.  The PHA (or PI) can be related to the incident particle energy by applying the appropriate {\bf response-function}, and higher data calibration level products may replace or augment these values with quantities such as energy, or perhaps particle or energy flux.

> There is currently no UCD defined for a raw pulse height amplitude measure like PHA (or PI). PHA is such an important quantity to \gls{HEA} datasets that we propose adding a new UCD {\em instr.pulse\/} for these raw data values, that can be combined with more general UCD terms to describe parameters of the pulse, like {\em instr.pulse;stat.max}, {\em instr.pulse;arith.sum} as an integrated quantity, {\em instr.pulse;stat.fwmh}, etc.  We note that the background signal (both of instrumental and cosmological origin) may be significant for many \gls{HEA} detectors and so the detected events may be unrelated to any observed source on the sky.  For Cherenkov neutrino detectors, this quantity might refer to the number of observed photon hits from secondary particle photon generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is currently no UCD defined for a raw pulse height amplitude measure like PHA (or PI). PHA is such an important quantity to \gls{HEA} datasets that we propose adding a new UCD {\em instr.pulse\/} for these raw data values.  {\em instr.pulse\/} can be combined with more general UCD terms to describe pulse parameters recorded by the pulse height analyzer electronics.  Typically, PHA corresponds to the integrated signal detected by the electronics, which could therefore be described using the UCD {\em instr.pulse;arith.sum}.  For some detectors, additional pulse parameters such as the peak pulse height or pulse width are important, and could be described by UCDs {\em instr.pulse;stat.max} and {\em instr.pulse;stat.fwmh}, respectively, and so on.  We note that the background signal (both of instrumental and cosmological origin) may be significant for many \gls{HEA} detectors and so the detected events may be unrelated to any observed source on the sky.  For Cherenkov neutrino detectors, this quantity might refer to the number of observed photon hits from secondary particle photon generation.
```

Author: I agree with this enriched description of the properties for a pulse height. 
Thanks

%mireille : discarded choice now; we should go forward this step 
%One previously proposed solution suggested using the combination of existing UCDs {\em src.var.amplitude;src.var.pulse;stat.uncalib\/} for PHA, but this is not appropriate since the connection to {\em src\/} (``observed source viewed on the sky'') is misleading and {\em src.var.amplitude\/} is defined as the ``amplitude of variation'' of the source which is a completely separate concept from an astronomical perspective.

\paragraph{Event Type}

> For \gls{VHE} (and GeV) gamma-ray data, there is the notion of event type (see \S~\ref{sec:evttype}) that can be mandatory for some data releases.  We propose to use a combined UCD {\em meta.code.class;instr.detection\/} to tag the proposed {\bf event\_type} parameter.

Reviewer: Would "to tag event type" make more sense?  Similar comment to "event_grade": assuming all instruments/facilities use "event_type" as a column name is too optimistic.

%Mireille clarify the usage of pdgid , as a value in the messenger column. 
For particle detectors, a wide range of different particles might have to be described. As is customary in particle physics, we propose to facilitate the use of the Particle Data Group Identifier\footnote{see \url{https://www.phy.bnl.gov/twister/bee/particles/}} as reference for any particle. For instance, we can populate the {\em messenger\/} column describing {\em e.g.\/}, $\nu_{\tau}$ and $\bar{\nu}_{\tau}$  with {\em pdgid+16\/} and {\em \hbox{pdgid-16}\/} respectively.
% $\nu_{\tau}$ and $\bar{\nu}_{\tau}$ as {\em pdgid+16\/} and {\em \hbox{pdgid-16}\/}

One should note that electrons are denoted by the UCD {\em phys.electron\/} in the current version of the UCD list \citep{2024ivoa.spec.1218C} and are not grouped under the {\em phys.particle\/} hierarchy.
Marking {\em phys.electron\/} (and {\em phys.electron.degen\/}) as obsolete or not recommended and adding the term  {\em phys.particle.electron\/} to the UCD list would improve the consistency of the {\em phys.particle\/} branch.

> However, as many data sets in the IVOA projects may already be tagged with {\em phys.electron\/} this may require maintenance costs that should be evaluated. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, as many data sets in the IVOA projects may already be tagged with {\em phys.electron\/} this may incur maintenance costs that should be evaluated. 
```

Author: +1 thanks

\subsubsection{Instrument-related Quantities}

> We propose to add a new UCD {\em instr.detection\/} as the base of the hierarchy to describe instrument-related properties of particle events detected by \gls{HEA} detectors.  Initially, we propose a small set of event-related UCDs that identify key properties that are particularly important for \gls{HEA} data analysis.

Reviewer: As I've argued before, instr.detection is in my view worse than instr.event because "detection" has a real and widely used meaning.

Reviewer 2: Agree with you. But as it is just an UCD, I am in favor to make this compromise

\paragraph{Event Grade}

> For imaging X-ray instruments (especially those based on CCD detectors), detected events typically deposit charge into more than a single detector pixel.  The events are assigned a ``grade'' based on how charge is deposited into the central pixel and surrounding pixels, and the grade information is essential for data analysis since typically only a subset of grades will correspond to valid events.  We propose to add a new UCD {\em meta.code.class;instr.detection\/} that identifies event grades.

Reviewer: The last sentence doesn't make sense any more.  You are suggesting meta.code.class;instr.detection for both event-grade and event-type, so the proposed UCDs do NOT "identify event grade" or "identify event type" as you can't differentiate them.

Author: Thanks , that is true. 
Identification of an event property like grade is made via the _event_grade_ column name, and _event_type_  identifies the type of event , as decided by the reduction pipeline. 
Having the same UCD used in VOTable happens regularly in the VO datasets. 
I will correct the text .

Reviewer: > Thanks , that is true. Identification of an event property like grade is made via the _event_grade_ column name, and _event_type_ identifies the type of event , as decided by the reduction pipeline. Having the same UCD used in VOTable happens regularly in the VO datasets. I will correct the text .

I understand that, but using the same UCDs does not help interoperability because the names of these significant data columns (recall that we have specifically called out these few quantities in the HEIG note from among at least several hundred different columns actually used in HEA datasets) are not standardized across facilities.  As a thought experiment, suppose that the two spatial world coordinate axes (ra and dec) did not have standardized names from dataset to dataset and you only have a single UCD like pos.spatialaxis rather than pos.eq.ra, pos.eq.dec to describe them both.  Wouldn't interoperability be significantly compromised in this circumstance?  That is the equivalent of the case here for these data quantities.

\paragraph{Pulse Height}

For many X-ray and gamma-ray instruments, the signal observed in a given detector spectral channel is the result of event counting and would typically be recorded as a Pulse Height Amplitude (PHA), or perhaps a Pulse Invariant (PI) value that is calculated from PHA by applying an appropriate gain calibration.  The PHA (or PI) can be related to the incident particle energy by applying the appropriate {\bf response-function}, and higher data calibration level products may replace or augment these values with quantities such as energy, or perhaps particle or energy flux.

> There is currently no UCD defined for a raw pulse height amplitude measure like PHA (or PI). PHA is such an important quantity to \gls{HEA} datasets that we propose adding a new UCD {\em instr.pulse\/} for these raw data values, that can be combined with more general UCD terms to describe parameters of the pulse, like {\em instr.pulse;stat.max},{\em instr.pulse;arith.sum} as an integrated quantity, {\em instr.pulse;stat.fwmh}, etc.  We note that the background signal (both of instrumental and cosmological origin) may be significant for many \gls{HEA} detectors and so the detected events may be unrelated to any observed source on the sky.  For Cherenkov neutrino detectors, this quantity might refer to the number of observed photon hits from secondary particle photon generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is currently no UCD defined for a raw pulse height amplitude measure like PHA (or PI). PHA is such an important quantity to \gls{HEA} datasets that we propose adding a new UCD {\em instr.pulse\/} for these raw data values, that can be combined with more general UCD terms to describe parameters of the pulse, like {\em instr.pulse;stat.max}, {\em instr.pulse;arith.sum} as an integrated quantity, {\em instr.pulse;stat.fwmh}, etc.  We note that the background signal (both of instrumental and cosmological origin) may be significant for many \gls{HEA} detectors and so the detected events may be unrelated to any observed source on the sky.  For Cherenkov neutrino detectors, this quantity might refer to the number of observed photon hits from secondary particle photon generation.
```

%mireille : discarded choice now; we should go forward this step 
%One previously proposed solution suggested using the combination of existing UCDs {\em src.var.amplitude;src.var.pulse;stat.uncalib\/} for PHA, but this is not appropriate since the connection to {\em src\/} (``observed source viewed on the sky'') is misleading and {\em src.var.amplitude\/} is defined as the ``amplitude of variation'' of the source which is a completely separate concept from an astronomical perspective.

\paragraph{Event Type}

> For \gls{VHE} (and GeV) gamma-ray data, there is the notion of event type (see \S~\ref{sec:evttype}) that can be mandatory for some data releases.  We propose to use a combined UCD {\em meta.code.class;instr.detection\/} that identifies these data values.

Reviewer: Same comment as for event grade.

\subsubsection{Physical Quantities}

The messengers for \gls{HEA} observations may include particles other than the ones currently described in the UCD list.  Because some instruments can now distinguish electrons from positrons\footnote{For example, the Fermi-LAT instrument.}, as well antiprotons from protons\footnote{For example, the AMS-2 experiment.}, we also propose to add {\em phys.particle.positron\/} and {\em phys.particle.antiproton\/}, as well as {\em phys.particle.cosmicray\/} and unify them all under the {\em phys.particle\/} UCD hierarchy.

%Mireille clarify the usage of pdgid , as a value in the messenger column. 

> For particle detectors, a wide range of different particles might have to be described. As is customary in particle physics, we propose to facilitate the use of the Particle Data Group Identifier\footnote{see \url{https://www.phy.bnl.gov/twister/bee/particles/}} as reference for any particle. For instance  we can fill the 'messenger' column describing {\em e.g.\/}, $\nu_{\tau}$ and $\bar{\nu}_{\tau}$  with {\em pdgid+16\/} and {\em \hbox{pdgid-16}\/} respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For particle detectors, a wide range of different particles might have to be described. As is customary in particle physics, we propose to facilitate the use of the Particle Data Group Identifier\footnote{see \url{https://www.phy.bnl.gov/twister/bee/particles/}} as reference for any particle. For instance, we can populate the {\em messenger\/} column describing {\em e.g.\/}, $\nu_{\tau}$ and $\bar{\nu}_{\tau}$  with {\em pdgid+16\/} and {\em \hbox{pdgid-16}\/} respectively.
```

% $\nu_{\tau}$ and $\bar{\nu}_{\tau}$ as {\em pdgid+16\/} and {\em \hbox{pdgid-16}\/}

> One should note that electrons are denoted by the UCD {\em phys.electron\/} in the current version of the UCD list \citep{2024ivoa.spec.1218C} and  not grouped under the {\em phys.particle\/} hierarchy that would improve the consistency of the {\em phys.particle} branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One should note that electrons are denoted by the UCD {\em phys.electron\/} in the current version of the UCD list \citep{2024ivoa.spec.1218C} and are not grouped under the {\em phys.particle\/} hierarchy.
```

> That could be solved by marking {\em phys.electron\/} (and {\em phys.electron.degen\/}) as obsolete or not recommended, and adding the term  {\em phys.particle.electron\/} to the UCD list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Marking {\em phys.electron\/} (and {\em phys.electron.degen\/}) as obsolete or not recommended and adding the term  {\em phys.particle.electron\/} to the UCD list would improve the consistency of the {\em phys.particle\/} branch.
```

> However, as many data sets in the IVOA projects are already tagged with {\em phys.electron\/} this may require maintenance costs that should be evaluated . 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, as many data sets in the IVOA projects may already be tagged with {\em phys.electron\/} this may require maintenance costs that should be evaluated. 
```

> It will be up to the IVOA to evaluate the benefice/cost ratio of such a change. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The IVOA should therefore evaluate the benefit/cost ratio of such a change. 
```

> The UCD term {\em phys.electron\/} is available anyway and can be used to tag an event related to electron particles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Finally, we propose to add the most commonly used astronomical messenger to the UCD list as {\em phys.particle.photon\/}.

\subsubsection{Statistical Parameters}

Since statistical lower and upper limits play a significant role in \gls{HEA} data analysis, we propose adding new UCDs {\em stat.lowerlimit\/} and {\em stat.upperlimit\/} to explicitly identify data quantities as lower or upper limits.  We suggest that the existing UCDs {\em stat.min\/} and {\em stat.max\/} be restricted to meaning the minimum and maximum statistic, rather than the current definitions ``Minimum or lowest limit'' and ``Maximum or upper limit'', which blend statistical confidence intervals and limits into a  single UCD\null. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also propose new UCD terms {\em stat.error.minus\/} and {\em stat.error.plus\/} to identify the more negative and more positive statistical errors to handle the common case of asymmetric errors.
```

>  A specification of a confidence level is necessary for the user to interpret both confidence intervals and lower/upper limits meaningfully, and this level can be described by the existing UCD {\em stat.confidenceLevel\/}, providing we change the syntax code of the latter from `P' to `Q' so that the UCD can be attached as a secondary word to existing UCD {\em stat.error\/} .

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 A specification of a confidence level is necessary for the user to interpret both confidence intervals and lower/upper limits meaningfully, and this level can be described by the existing UCD {\em stat.confidenceLevel\/}, providing we change the syntax code of the latter from `P' to `Q' so that the UCD can be attached as a secondary word to existing UCD {\em stat.error\/}, and the newly proposed UCDs {\em stat.error.minus\/}, {\em stat.error.plus\/}, {\em stat.lowerlimit\/}, and {\em stat.upperlimit\/}.
```

 
% mireille  We should use here the terms that have been recently discussed and approved by the semantics group . I would like the semantics discussions that happened to appear  in this note. 

> We also include  UCDs terms {\em stat.error.minus\/}, {\em stat.error.plus\/}, {\em stat.lowerlimit\/}, and {\em stat.upperlimit\/}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The shape of any statistical distribution is an essential quantity for interpreting the meaning of any statistical properties.  Too often a Gaussian distribution or a distribution that can be characterized by a simple set of moments ({\em e.g.\/}, mean, variance, skewness, kurtosis) are assumed, but in the extreme Poisson regime common in \gls{HEA} these assumptions are often invalid.  We propose adding a UCD {\em stat.distribution\/} to identify a quantity that defines the distribution of a statistical variable such as  a likelihood profile.
% mireille This assumes that a column will contain a full set of data values. Is this ? 

> In fact it would make the UCD work as a term compatible to a data product type , so ambiguous in terms of role . 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
%In fact it would make the UCD work as a term compatible to a data product type , so ambiguous in terms of role . 
```

Author: +1

E & {\em phot.flux.particle.sb\/} & Particle flux surface brightness (dimensionality: $\rm [L^{-2}\,T^{-1}\,\hbox{sr}^{-1}]$)  \cr
S & {\em phys.particle.antiprotron\/}  & Related to anti-proton \cr
S & {\em phys.particle.cosmicray\/} & Related to cosmic rays particles  \cr

> %S & {\em phys.particle.electron\/} & Related to electron  \cr

Reviewer: ```suggestion
S & {\em phys.particle.electron\/} & Related to electron  \cr
```

S & {\em phys.particle.photon\/} & Related to photon  \cr
S & {\em phys.particle.positron\/} & Related to positron  \cr

> % Mireille we cannot have these terms in the UCD tree ; that would imply importing all possible encoding of any kind 

Reviewer: I disagree about phys.particle.pdgid.  phys.particle.pdgid is a UCD that identifies a Particle Group Identifier, for example a column in a FITS file that records the pdgid for each event.  It's not the same as UCDs that encode all possible pdgids as part of the UCD name.

> %S & {\em phys.particle.pdgid\/} & Particle Data Group Identifier \cr

Reviewer: ```suggestion
S & {\em phys.particle.pdgid\/} & Particle Data Group Identifier \cr
```

Author: The UCD combination 'meta.id;phys.particle' is useful in this case  and is fully general if data providers  use a different particle identifier. 
The column can be named as 'messenger_pid' if this will be the adopted standard for every High Energy archive.  
Is there a PDGid for all cases mentioned in the messenger table ?

Reviewer: > The UCD combination 'meta.id;phys.particle' is useful in this case and is fully general if data providers use a different particle identifier. The column can be named as 'messenger_pid' if this will be the adopted standard for every High Energy archive. Is there a PDGid for all cases mentioned in the messenger table ?

I wouldn't suggest changing 'messenger' to 'messenger_pdgid'.  I don't think PDG ID is something that would be recognized by the vast majority of astrophysicists, even X-ray or gamma-ray astrophysicists.  It's primarily used by particle physicists, but there is cross-over for particle astrophysics and cosmic ray astrophysics.  That's why we proposed 'messenger' to allow common messenger names but also the option of specifying pdgid{+|-}NN, so that 'messenger' can handle all cases (I believe that there are over 500 different PDG IDs defined, although many of them are exotics).

If meta.id;phys.particle can be applied to (e.g., a column containing a list of) PDG IDs then phys.particle.pdgid may not be necessary.  But in that case what UCD should be used similarly to cases where (e.g.) physical.particle.neutrino or physical.particle.proton are used if the particle is identified only by PDG ID?

\begin{landscape}
\begin{center}
\begin{longtable}{ | m{0.15\linewidth} | m{0.23\linewidth} | m{0.07\linewidth} | m{0.07\linewidth} | m{0.4\linewidth} | m{0.05\linewidth} |}
\hline

{\centering \bf Column Name}     &{\centering \bf UCD} &{\centering \bf Unit} &{\centering \bf Type} &{\centering \bf Description} &{\centering \bf MAN}\\
\hline

>  ev\_xel & \ucd{meta.number;instr.detection} &  unitless & int & {Number of events in an event\_list }& NO \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 ev\_xel & \ucd{meta.number;instr.detection} &  unitless & int & {Number of events in an {\bf event-list}}& NO \\
```
